# Interna... Internazio... Internationaliz... I18n.

Cruddl provides a sophisticated way to provide human readable field and type names and storing them along where they belong: together with the model. A client consuming a cruddl graphql api can not only query data and meta schema, but also fetch labels and hints. 

## How to define localization
A cruddl project contains graphql schema files and json/yaml object files. All localization entries must be located an object `i18n`. Inside of the `i18n` object, <i>namespaces</i> can be defined beginning at the root namespace:  
```yaml
i18n:
  en:
    types:
      Hero:
        singular: Hero
        plural: Heroes
        hint: A brave person with cool features
        fields:
          name:
            label: Name
            hint: The name of the hero
          age: age # shortcut for age: { label: age, hint: undefined }
    fields:
      createdAt:
        label: Created at
        hint: When this hero's record was created
  de:
    types:
      Hero:
        ...
    fields:
      createdAt:
        label: Erfasst am
        hint: Wann der Held in diesem System angelegt wurde
      updatedAt: Geändert am
      id: ID
    namespaces:
      logistics:
        types: ...
        fields: ...
      ...
```
Localizable parts are model object types (RootEntitiy, ChildEntity, EntityExtension, ValueObject) and their fields. I18n for fields can also be defined independently to provide translation for fields which appear in several types, e. g. `createdAt`.

Hints
* `someField: 'My label'` is a shortcut for `someField: { label: 'My label' }` 
* fields can be specified on a namespace for all type having such a field (e. g. `createdAt`)

## Get localization for specific fields and types
In the graphql meta schema, there are `localization(resolutionOrder)` fields on `ObjectType` and `Field` which try to provide a full set of localization information.
The `resolutionOrder` argument expects a list of languages (code from the yaml/json files) and can contain other strings for special resolution features.
* `_LOCALE_LANGUAGE` is translated to the language code provided with a graphql query. This way the language can be automatically selected from a user session an http header etc.
* `_WARNING` writes a warning to the logger if no localization could be retrieved from previous resolution order.  
* `_GENERIC` is auto-generated localization from field and type names (e. G. `orderDate` => `Order date`)
The default `resolutionOrder` is `["_LOCALE_LANG", "_WARNING", "_GENERIC"]` (if not specified). 

### Resolution rules
* `localization(...)` tries always to get a complete set of `FieldLocalization` or `FieldLocalization` from all namespaces applying to the type/field and given languages.
* Namespaces can provide localization for sub-namespaces (but not vice versa)
* There will never be a localization in another than the first language, if in the first language there is a namespace which has a matching localization (namespace over language). 
* Field i18n specified in a type wins over a namespace field i18n.
* When localizing things twice in the same language and namespace, random wins.
* Localization resolution can return undefined values. There will be not errors on missing translations.
 
## Formal definition of namespaces
### Typescript interfaces
```typescript
interface Namespace {
    types?: { [name: string]: Type }
    namespaces?: { [name: string ]: Namespace }
    fields?: { [name: string]: Field|string }
}

interface Type {
    singular?: string
    plural?: string
    hint?: string
    fields?: { [name: string]: Field|string }
}

interface Field {
    label?: string
    hint?: string
}
```
### JSON Schema
```json```

```